Instructional Materials Review and
                Approval

                    Mathematics K-12 Quality Rubric

                   Approved by the State Board of Education on November 22, 2024

Updated November 26, 2024                                                         Page 1 of 7
            Implementation Quality

1. Intentional Instructional Design

Materials support educators in effective implementation through intentional course, unit, and lesson-level design.

1.1 Course-Level Design

1.1a Materials include a scope and sequence outlining the TEKS, ELPS, and concepts taught in the course. Implementation Guide

1.1b Materials include suggested pacing (pacing guide/calendar) to support effective implementation for various instructional calendars (e.g., varying numbers of instructional days - 165, 180, 210). Implementation Guide

1.1c  Materials include an explanation for the rationale of unit order as well as how concepts to be learned connect throughout
1.1d  the course. Unit order: Implementation Guide. Concepts connected through course: Module Planner

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Implementation Guide -

      Materials include protocols with corresponding guidance for unit and lesson internalization. see https://www.deansforimpact.org/files/assets/hqimelementarymathlessoninternalization.pdf

        Materials include resources and guidance for instructional leaders to support teachers with implementing the materials as
1.1e designed. TBD, suggest new component

1.2 Unit-Level Design

  1.2a Materials include comprehensive unit overviews that provide the background content knowledge and academic
           vocabulary necessary to effectively teach the concepts in the unit. Add to module planner

  1.2b Materials contain supports for families in both Spanish and English for each unit with suggestions on supporting the progress of their student. Family Letter

1.3 Lesson-Level Design

           Materials include comprehensive, structured, detailed lesson plans that include daily objectives, questions, tasks,
  1.3a materials, and instructional assessments required to meet the content and language standards of the lesson (aligned with

           the TEKS and the ELPS).Lessons and lesson planners
  1.3b Materials include a lesson overview listing the teacher and student materials necessary to effectively deliver the lesson,

           and the suggested timing for each lesson component.Lesson planner, timing has to be added
  1.3c Materials include guidance on the effective use of lesson materials for extended practice (e.g., homework, extension, enrichment).Needs to be added to lesson

Updated November 26, 2024  Page 2 of 7
2. Progress Monitoring

Materials support educators in effective implementation through frequent, strategic opportunities to monitor and
respond to student progress.

2.1 Instructional Assessments

  2.1a Materials include a variety of instructional assessments at the unit and lesson level (including diagnostic, formative, and summative) that vary in types of tasks and questions.Lessons and module
  2.1b Materials include the definition and intended purpose for the types of instructional assessments included.Implementation Guide
  2.1c Materials include teacher guidance to ensure consistent and accurate administration of instructional assessments.Implementation G
  2.1d Diagnostic, formative, and summative assessments are aligned to the TEKS and objectives of the course, unit, or lesson.Lessons and
  2.1e Instructional assessments include TEKS-aligned items at varying levels of complexity. Lessons and module, must be updated

2.2 Data Analysis and Progress Monitoring

  2.2a Instructional assessments and scoring information provide guidance for interpreting student performance.Reporting and CC
           Materials provide guidance for the use of included tasks and activities to respond to student trends in performance on

  2.2b assessments.Reporting and CC
  2.2c Materials include tools for teachers to track student progress and growth, and tools for students to track their own progress and growthR. eporting, but we need something for students

3. Supports for All Learners

Materials support educators in reaching all learners through design focused on engagement, representation, and
action/expression for learner variability.

3.1 Differentiation and Scaffolds

  3.1a Materials include teacher guidance for differentiated instruction, activities, and paired (scaffolded) lessons for students who have not yet reached proficiency on grade-level content and skills. We have all but differentiated paired lessons
  3.1b Materials include pre-teaching or embedded supports for unfamiliar vocabulary and references in text (e.g., figurative language, idioms, academic language). (T/S)WTL, will have ELPS supports added to lessosn
  3.1c Materials include teacher guidance for differentiated instruction, enrichment, and extension activities for students

           who have demonstrated proficiency in grade-level content and skill.We have differentiated instruction and enrichment, but not extension

3.2 Instructional Methods

  3.2a Materials include explicit (direct) prompts and guidance to support the teacher in modeling and explaining the concept(s) to be learned. Scripting is included in the lesson
  3.2b Materials include teacher guidance and recommendations for effective lesson delivery and facilitation using a variety of instructional approaches.Included in lessons already
  3.2c Materials support multiple types of practice (e.g., guided, independent, collaborative) and include guidance for teachers

           and recommended structures (e.g., whole group, small group, individual) to support effective implementation.
                                          We don't have guided practice but cover the rest.

Updated November 26, 2024  Page 3 of 7
3.3 Support for Emergent Bilingual Students

           Materials include teacher guidance on providing linguistic accommodations for various levels of language proficiency
  3.3a [as defined by the English Language Proficiency Standards (ELPS)], which are designed to engage students in using

           increasingly more academic language. Need to confirm that our levels align with ELPS, adjust accordingly.
           Materials include implementation guidance to support teachers in effectively using the materials in state-approved
  3.3b bilingual/ESL programs. TBD
           Materials include embedded guidance for teachers to support emergent bilingual students in developing academic
  3.3c vocabulary, increasing comprehension, building background knowledge, and making cross-linguistic connections
           through oral and written discourse.Included in lessons already
  3.3d If designed for dual language immersion (DLI) programs, materials include resources that outline opportunities to address metalinguistic transfer from English to the partner language. TBD

Updated November 26, 2024  Page 4 of 7
                Learning Quality

4. Depth and Coherence of Key Concepts

Materials are designed to meet the rigor of the standards while connecting concepts within and across grade
levels/courses.

4.1 Depth of Key Concepts

           Practice opportunities over the course of a lesson and/or unit (including instructional assessments) require students to
  4.1a demonstrate depth of understanding aligned to the TEKS.Needs to be confirmed in lesson content
  4.1b Questions and tasks progressively increase in rigor and complexity, leading to grade-level proficiency in the mathematics TEKS.Does not currentlly happen within lessons or assessments

4.2 Coherence of Key Concepts

           Materials demonstrate coherence across units by explicitly connecting patterns, big ideas, and relationships between
  4.2a mathematical concepts.We can add to lessons, and include "Apply" standards in correlations.

           Materials demonstrate coherence across units by connecting the content and language learned in previous courses/grade
  4.2b levels and what will be learned in future courses/grade levels to the content to be learned in the current course/grade

           level.Included in lessons already
  4.2c Materials demonstrate coherence at the lesson level by connecting students' prior knowledge of concepts and procedures from the current and prior grade level(s) to new mathematical knowledge and skills.Spark Your Learning does this

4.3 Spaced and Interleaved Practice

  4.3a Materials provide spaced retrieval opportunities with previously learned skills and concepts across lessons and units.
  4.3b Materials provide interleaved practice opportunities with previously learned skills and concepts across lessons and units.

         We do not do formal spaced or interleaved practice currently

5. Balance of Conceptual and Procedural Understanding

Materials are designed to balance conceptual understanding, procedural skills, and fluency.

5.1 Development of Conceptual Understanding

           Questions and tasks require students to interpret, analyze, and evaluate models and representations for mathematical
  5.1a concepts and situationsN. eed to confirm there is enough representation of this.
  5.1b Questions and tasks require students to create models to represent mathematical situations.Covered, but maybe make an icon?
  5.1c Questions and tasks provide opportunities for students to apply conceptual understanding to new problem situations and contexts. Included in lessons already

Updated November 26, 2024  Page 5 of 7
5.2 Development of Fluency

           Materials provide tasks that are designed to build student automaticity and fluency necessary to complete grade-level
  5.2a tasks.How do we build/amplify the fluency story?
  5.2b Materials provide opportunities for students to practice the application of efficient, flexible, and accurate mathematical procedures within the lesson and/or throughout a unit.Included in lessons already
  5.2c Materials provide opportunities for students to evaluate procedures, processes, and solutions for efficiency, flexibility,

           and accuracy within the lesson and throughout a unit. Needs to be labeled/amplified
  5.2d Materials contain embedded supports for teachers to guide students toward increasingly efficient approaches.Included in lessons a

5.3 Balance of Conceptual Understanding and Procedural Fluency

  5.3a Materials explicitly state how the conceptual and procedural emphasis of the TEKS are addressed.Add to module planner
           Questions and tasks include the use of concrete models and manipulatives, pictorial representations (figures/drawings),

  5.3b and abstract representations, as required by the TEKS.Included in lessons already
           Materials include supports for students in connecting, creating, defining, and explaining concrete and representational

  5.3c models to abstract (symbolic/numeric/algorithmic) concepts, as required by the TEKS.Included in lessons already

Updated November 26, 2024  Page 6 of 7
5.4 Development of Academic Mathematical Language

           Materials provide opportunities for students to develop academic mathematical language using visuals, manipulatives,
  5.4a and other language development strategies.Included in lessons already

           Materials include embedded teacher guidance to scaffold and support students' development and use of academic
  5.4b mathematical vocabulary in context. Included in lessons already

           Materials include embedded teacher guidance to support the application of appropriate mathematical language to
  5.4c include vocabulary, syntax, and discourse to include guidance to support mathematical conversations that provide

           opportunities for students to hear, refine, and use math language with peers and develop their math language toolkit over
           time as well as guide teachers to support student responses using exemplar responses to questions and tasks.

                                                                                              Included in lessons already

5.5 Process Standards Connections

  5.5a TEKS process standards are integrated appropriately into the materials. Included in lessons (update from SMPs)
  5.5b Materials include a description of how TEKS process standards are incorporated and connected throughout the course.Implementation G

           Materials include a description for each unit of how TEKS process standards are incorporated and connected throughout
  5.5c the unit.Add to module planner
  5.5d Materials include an overview of the TEKS process standards incorporated into each lesson. Will be in lesson planner

6. Productive Struggle

Materials support students in applying disciplinary practices to productive problem-solving, including explaining and
revising their thinking.

6.1 Student Self-Efficacy

          Materials provide opportunities for students to think mathematically, persevere through solving problems, and to make
 6.1a sense of mathematics. Included in lessons already

          Materials support students in understanding, explaining, and justifying that there can be multiple ways to represent and
 6.1b solve problems and complete tasks. Need to beef this up in lessons.

          Materials are designed to require students to make sense of mathematics through multiple opportunities for students to
 6.1c do, write about, and discuss math with peers and teachers. Included in lessons already

6.2 Facilitating Productive Struggle

           Materials support teachers in guiding students to share and reflect on their problem-solving approaches, including
  6.2a explanations, arguments, and justifications.Included in lessons (update labeling to call out these three aspects)

           Materials include prompts and guidance to support teachers in providing explanatory feedback based on student
  6.2b responses and anticipated misconceptions. Included in lessons already

Updated November 26, 2024  Page 7 of 7
