   WebbAlign®/Dr. Norman Webb © 2015. All rights Reserved. Revised September 2014

                               Mathematics DOK Definitions

DOK 1 (Recall)

DOK 1 is defined by the rote recall of information or performance of a simple, routine
procedure. For example, repeating a memorized fact, definition, or term, performing a simple
algorithm, rounding a number, or applying a formula are DOK 1 performances.
Performing a one-step computation or operation, executing a well-defined multi-step procedure
or a direct computational algorithm are also included in this category. Examples of well-defined
multi-step procedures include finding the mean or median or performing long division. Reading
information directly from a graph, plugging data into an electronic device to derive an answer, or
simple paraphrasing are all tasks that are considered a level of complexity comparable to recall.
A student answering a Level 1 item either knows the answer or does not: that is, the item does
not need to be "figured out" or "solved."

At a DOK 1, problems in context are straightforward and the solution path is obvious. For
example, the problem may contain a keyword that indicates the operation needed. Other DOK 1
examples include plotting points on a coordinate system, using coordinates with the distance
formula, or drawing lines of symmetry of geometric figures.
At more advanced levels of mathematics, symbol manipulation and solving a quadratic equation
or a system of two linear equations with two unknowns are considered comparable to recall
assuming students are expected or likely to use well-known procedures (e.g. factoring,
completing the square, substitution, or elimination) to derive a solution. Operating on
polynomials or radicals, using the laws of exponents, or simplifying rational expressions are
considered rote procedures.
Verbs should not be classified as any category without considering what the verb is acting upon
or the verb's direct object. "Identify attributes of a polygon" is recall, but "identify the rate of
change for an exponential function" requires a more complex analysis. To describe by listing the
steps used to solve a problem is recall (i.e, Show your work) whereas to describe by providing a
mathematical argument or rationale for a solution is more complex.

Webb, N. L. Alignment study in language arts, mathematics, science, and social studies of state
standards and assessments for four states. A study of the State Collaborative on Assessment &
Student Standards (SCASS) Technical Issues in Large-Scale Assessment (TILSA). Washington,
D. C.: Council of Chief State School Officers, December 2002. Revised in 2014 by Norman
Webb, Sara Christopherson with the help of Lynn Raith.

      WebbAlign offers alignment studies and DOK professional development training.
 Please contact WCEPS at webbalign@wceps.org or 1-877-249-4211 for more information.
   WebbAlign®/Dr. Norman Webb © 2015. All rights Reserved. Revised September 2014

DOK 2 (Skill/Concept)

DOK 2 involves engaging in some mental processing beyond a habitual response as well as
decision-making about how to approach the problem or activity. This category can require
conceptual understanding and/or demonstrating conceptual knowledge by explaining thinking in
terms of concepts.

DOK 2 tasks includes distinguishing among mathematical ideas, processing information about
the underlying structure, drawing relationships among ideas, deciding among and performing
appropriate skills, applying properties or conventions within a relevant and necessary context,
transforming among different representations, interpreting and solving problems and/or graphs.
When given a problem statement, formulating an equation or inequality, deriving a solution, and
reporting the solution in the context of the problem fit within DOK 2. Processes such as
classifying, organizing, and estimating that involve attending to multiple attributes, features, or
properties also fall into this category.

Verifying that the number of objects in one set is larger or fewer than the number of objects in a
second set by matching pairs or forming equivalent groups is a DOK 2 activity for a
kindergartener. A first grader modeling a joining or separating situation pictorially or physically
also is in this category.

Skills and concepts include constructing a graph and interpreting the meaning of critical features
of a function, beyond just identifying or finding such features as well as describing the effects of
parameter changes. Note, however, that using a well-defined procedure to find features of a
standard function, such as the slope of a linear function with one variable or a quadratic, is a
DOK 1. Graphing higher order or irregular functions is a DOK 2. Basic computation, as well as
converting between different units of measurement, are generally a Category 1, but illustrating a
computation by different representations (e.g. equations and a base-ten model) to explain the
results is a DOK 2. Computing measures of central tendency (applying set procedures) is a DOK
1, but interpreting such measures for a data set within its context or using measures to compare
multiple data sets is a DOK 2. Performing original formal proofs is beyond DOK 2, but
explaining in one's own words the reasons for an action or application of a property is
comparable to a DOK 2. Activities at a DOK 2 are not limited only to number skills, but may
involve visualization skills (e.g. mentally rotating a 3D figure or transforming a figure) and
probability skills requiring more than simple counting (e.g. determining a sample space or
probability of a compound event). Other activities at this category include detecting or describing
non-trivial patterns, explaining the purpose and use of experimental procedures, and carrying out
experimental procedures.

      WebbAlign offers alignment studies and DOK professional development training.
 Please contact WCEPS at webbalign@wceps.org or 1-877-249-4211 for more information.
   WebbAlign®/Dr. Norman Webb © 2015. All rights Reserved. Revised September 2014
DOK 3 (Strategic Thinking)
DOK 3 requires reasoning and analyzing using mathematical principles, ideas, structure, and
practices. DOK 3 includes solving involved problems; conjecturing; creating novel solutions and
forms of representation; devising original proofs, mathematical arguments, and critiques of
arguments; constructing mathematical models; and forming robust inferences and predictions.
Although DOK 2 also involves some problem solving, DOK 3 includes situations that are non-
routine, more demanding, more abstract, and more complex than DOK 2. Such activities are
characterized by producing sound and valid mathematical arguments when solving problems,
verifying answers, developing a proof, or drawing inferences. Note that the sophistication of a
mathematical argument that would be considered DOK 3 depends on the prior knowledge and
experiences of the person. For example, primary school student arguments for number problems
can be a DOK 3 activity (e.g. counting number of combinations, finding shortest route from
home to school, computing with large numbers) as can abstract reasoning in developing a logical
argument by students in higher grades. DOK 3 problems are those for which it is not evident
from the first reading what is needed to derive a solution and so require demanding reasoning to
work through. Such problems usually can be solved in different ways and may even have more
than one correct solution based on different stated assumptions. Paraphrasing in one's own words
or reproducing a proof that was previously demonstrated is a DOK 2. Applying properties and
producing arguments in proving a theorem or identity not previously seen is a DOK 3. Also in
the DOK 3 category is making sense of the mathematics in a situation, creating a mathematical
model of a situation considering contextual constraints, deriving a new formula, designing and
conducting an experiment, and interpreting findings.

      WebbAlign offers alignment studies and DOK professional development training.
 Please contact WCEPS at webbalign@wceps.org or 1-877-249-4211 for more information.
   WebbAlign®/Dr. Norman Webb © 2015. All rights Reserved. Revised September 2014

DOK 4 (Extended Thinking)
DOK 4 demands are at least as complex as those of DOK 3, but a main factor that distinguishes
the two categories is the need to perform activities over days and weeks (DOK 4) rather than in
one sitting (DOK 3). The extended time that accompanies this type of activity allows for creation
of original work and requires metacognitive awareness that typically increases the complexity of
a DOK 4 task overall, in comparison with DOK 3 activities. Category 4 activities require
complex reasoning, planning, research, and verification of work. Conducting a research project,
performance activity, an experiment, and a design project as well as creating a new theorem and
proof fit under Category 4. The extended time period is not a distinguishing factor if the required
work is only repetitive and does not require applying significant conceptual understanding and
higher-order thinking. For example, collecting water temperature from a river each day for a
month and then reporting the findings by constructing a graph is a DOK 2 activity. Developing a
mathematical model of the flow of water in a river for all four seasons using a number of
variables would be a DOK 4 activity. It is likely that a DOK 4 activity will require making
connections among a number of ideas or variables within the area of mathematics or among a
number of content areas. Category 4 activities require selecting an appropriate approach among
many alternatives to produce a product, conclusion, or finding, such as critiquing a body of
work, synthesizing ideas in a new way, or creating an original model.

                                   General Guidelines for Assigning DOK:
    · The DOK definitions can be applied to mathematics standards, tasks, or activities.
    · Consider the complexity of the mathematical demands, not the difficulty for students.
    · Consider the mathematical experience (prior knowledge) and grade-level expectations of

         a typical student.
    · Do not rely on verbs (describe, explain, evaluate, etc.). Instead, consider the content

         complexity required for an adequate response.
    · For multiple-choice assessment items, consider the item as a whole--including

         distractors--to judge complexity.
    · An expectation or item that is confusing due to error or wording does not reflect

         increased content complexity--it simply means the statement needs revisions.

      WebbAlign offers alignment studies and DOK professional development training.
 Please contact WCEPS at webbalign@wceps.org or 1-877-249-4211 for more information.
